INTRODUCTION. 11

· ancient moral systems‚ though the topic is very little elaborated
by modern philosophers. Particularly in post-Platonic times,
when the freedom of Greek political life was extinguished, and
men of culture had to find private outlets for their energy, was
Friendship brought into prominence. Numerous treatises were
specially devoted to it¹. A separate dialogue was given to it by
Plato, viz. the Lysis, and two whole books of the Nr‘comacleeon
Ethics (v111. and1x.) by Aristotle. In the laelius, however, the
range of questions discussed is sar narrower than was commonly
the case with the Greek philosophers who wrote on the subject.
The Greek φιλία included every form oi associadon, even the
relations of man to man, oi citizen to citizen, of purchaser to
buyer, and the like. Cicero, however, uses arrricitr'a in a
sense which is almost exactly that of the English ‘friendslnjo’
Nor does our author attempt that exhaustive discussion of all
questions which had been raised or might be raised, touching
Friendship in this narrower- sense, which we find in the two
above-mentioned books of the· lllt'comacleean Etbr'cs. The
practice of friendship is discussed almost to the exclusion of its

- theory. Cicero's treatise is indeed a kind ol popular essay
dealing with those aspecta of the subject which· could best be

Ι made interesting to readers in general. He again and again
during the course of the dialogue emphasizes the practical
character of the treatise. Indeed to have made it highly specu-
lative would have ill suited the characters of the interlocutors.

ξ 3» T lre structure, personagen ond other circumstances effllee
dialogice. '

a. Greek sources of tre treatise. We have a statement by
Α. Gellius (lived about 115-165A.1>·.) in his Noctes Atticae (1,
3, ιο) that Cicero imitated in the Laelius a book of Theo
phrastus, entitled περὶ φιλίας, which seems to have heen the
most famous os the many treatises on the subject. The imitation
was, on the showing os Gellius, exceedingly sree. Theophrastus
gave his own views and wrote sor philosophers; Cicero wrote sor
general readers and put his statements into the mouth of

,¹ Merely taking the catalogues rate works on the suhieetmems,
tn Diogenes Laertius we trud sena· Speusiuuusakenomates, hiem

 

